I've done about 200 hours of taped interviews for this book so far, and I have interviewed perhaps two or three people who actually write speech and paragraphs.
Leonard Baskin, he pointed it out to me.
I speak in complete paragraphs, don't I?
Well, I'll have to look at the transcript.
But I, believe me, I... Did he?
He did.
He actually did.
I used it more as a convenience that I certainly don't embarrass anybody on.
I just make the verbs agree in a very silent kind of way.
Thank you.
And so all those things have to be attended to.
And in fact, when I have a completed chapter, I have no problems even going over some of this material with you.
Because I want it light and...
And I want you to be happy with what I'm doing.
This is a remarkable library and you're a remarkable collector.
Well, I consider I'm owning the top of a totem pole.
And I want my camera to take some pictures of these portraits, by the way.
Without that, I would not be sure.
Well, it makes it a unique
library and the history of American book collection has never been, and I say this and I said it, has never been anything quite like it.
You've had John Carter Brown and John Nicholas Brown, but you haven't had the three generations and you don't have the back.
It's still quite very much a private collection with such a focus that this library maintains and has
Well, I suppose you could say the second generation Morgan was collected at bed.
Indeed, indeed.
Well, that's, again— You shouldn't run him out of the picture.
No, in fact, I haven't been there.
I spent yesterday at the Morgan Library, but I don't mean to at any point.
There was more than one generation mixed up with that, at least.
And there was a nephew there who was quite—Junius Spencer Morgan had something to do with, particularly in the manuscript end.
Yes, he lived down here.
Indeed.
In his Virgil collection.
Tell me, if you would, Mr. Scheide, about your decision to go for the 36 lines, if you can.
It's very obvious, really obscure about that.
There's nothing obscure about it.
It's just the first time we've talked to Salem in over 200 years.
Why shouldn't I try, at least?
Well, to explain something so obvious, we have already so many pieces of early printing.
It would be an obvious thing to try for, just a question of how much competition there would be.
Thank God there wasn't any.
We're very lucky.
Apparently, you had the reserve.
That was your competition as well, I guess, right?
That's my impression, yes.
But even though it was obvious, I mean, it wasn't.
as if the day it was announced, you came in and said, all right, that's it.
I mean, there were other considerations.
Well, the principal consideration was how much your Christmas is going to stir.
Yeah.
As far as I was concerned, I wouldn't like to say, I'm going to have it or something like that.
I would invite somebody else to fight.
and pushed me up, I might say that.
When I was here two years ago, and you were showing me some of your books, you offered the observation then that your favorite item in the library was the 1459 soldier.
Wrong.
1457 soldier.
It was the 57th.
Indeed.
And I wonder if you can say that now, or the 36 line by, after I jump to the top of the list.
Oh, I think so, because the 36-line Bible doesn't have the color printing in all the fancy stuff that the 57 solder does.
So 57 is still number one?
I don't mean to quantify it, but I guess a lot of collecting is the satisfaction of getting something so extraordinary that actually still makes it... You, I understand, are only the third private collector in history to own these five central
According to Roland, yes.
Well, I haven't heard anybody dispute it yet, and I've certainly looked around.
This is the only one that's been offered in 202 years.
That's right.
Huntington couldn't get one.
Morgan couldn't get one.
Ho couldn't get one.
And the other.
And your father couldn't get the 57 and 59 salted.
He couldn't get this either.
Well, that goes without saying.
How do you feel about that?
I mean, you have actually taken this collection and brought it to a level.
An unusual level.
Perhaps even a level that you didn't even think possible.
Is that possible?
Of course not.
One is entirely at the mercy of circumstances in these matters.
They were good circumstances for me.
I'm very thankful for that.
Is it the kind of... The 57 soldered hadn't come up for sale since 1857 when it was 400 years old.
until 1971.
This had come up for sale since 1789.
Those are remarkable pieces of luck, as far as I'm concerned.
This is one of the... That's all there is in it.
I just... I'm very, very happy, because I can be very lucky.
The 57th dollar was a private sale, and this was an uncontested auction.
I saw a letter from that...
that Dr. Rosenbach sent to your father, and he was offering them, what was it, the horrendous, perhaps?
And he said, well, and you'll never be able to get the 57 and 59 soldiers.
They are unprocurable.
And I quote that letter in my chapter.
Yeah, I'm sorry.
We didn't find that in time for my talk.
I saw the original at the Rosenbach Archive.
We found it this week, and we were looking for it.
You should have called it.
You certainly should have called it.
I mean, I have a Xerox of it.
Yeah, we do, too.
One time we had an exhibit here for Hans Krauss came down and had the soldiers out and so on, and had this letter right in the middle of it so he could look at it.
Another little story that you told me, which I'm using in my chapter, is when you and Mr. Krauss were at the Morgan Library and you were looking at something described as a complete fragment.
Right, right.
And I think that you had said that one reason you were teasing him a little bit because apparently it had passed through his hands.
And that phrase was probably even his.
I always think it's quite possible.
And so you asked him, what does it take to make a complete fragment?
And he said, booksellers talk, booksellers talk.
I pretty much repeat that little description.
You know the story about my meeting John Carter after he gave a talk on American collectors?
No, I don't.
Well, and you're writing about American collectors, let me say.
Indeed, sir.
Well, this is about 30, not quite 30 years ago.
He gave a talk at the Minotaur Library on American book collectors.
And since I am very conceited, at least I suppose I am, I went up to him afterwards and said, how come you didn't mention me?
And he said, oh, Bill, you're just an institution.
So, there you are.
So, you ought to put me in perspective.
Shortly after that, I went to a Bibliophile Congress in London, and they had an exhibit, a special exhibit put on, called British Private Collectors.
It was off Piccadilly.
I walked in there, and hitting me right in the eye, as soon as you went in, you couldn't miss it.
There were special lights on it and everything, but it was the 1457 Solver, owned by H.M.
And so I said to myself, I guess she is the private collector, and I am the institution, which didn't increase my love of the British anymore.
So this would have been before you had the 57, when?
Yes, before I had the soldier, but never mind.
Oh, I know.
She was the private collector, trumpeted as the British private collectors, no death duties, nothing at all, or paying full death duties as private collectors do, I beg your pardon.
Um, and the institution, uh, there's no different thing, of course, according to John Carter.
I found a very interesting letter from John Carter at the Newbury Library of all places.
Uh, he was involved in, did you know Lou Silver at all?
Yes, I know who you're meeting.
I may have, may have seen him much twice anymore.
Uh, but, but Carter wrote a letter to, to Mrs. Silver.
While Texas was, I ran across this because I have a chapter on the University of Texas.
I dare say you should.
And a very interesting thing, Mr. Carter was really one of the people responsible for scotching the sale to the university.
And that was sold to the University of Texas.
And then Carter came along and offered the same amount of money, guaranteed the same amount of money for a self-abee sale.
And so the family reconsidered it.
And then the Newbury Library stepped in
And they paid the same amount.
And then John Fleming sued the Silver Estate.
It's a long, drawn-out story, but it was in that suit that I was able to find all these letters that Carter had written.
And there's an interesting thing about the University of Texas and John Fleming.
I think there was no love lost between those two.
Probably not in that picture, no.
Bill was telling me that when Paul Needham was here, he discovered a 37th line.
That must have been... It has four letters in it.
But it's a 37th.
It does involve a... I remember when you were showing me your 42-line vinyl, one of the most exciting sequences for me was when you were showing me the 40-line pages.
There's no 43-line pages I know of.
So this actually augments by even though it's only four letters.
There was four letters left over.
Interesting.
And they are A-M-E-N.
A note to finish on in the biblical page.
Have you had a chance to study this Bible?
One of the
And the quality that impressed me so much was your complete knowledge of that 42-line Bible.
Well, it wasn't complete.
I just discovered something the other night that I'd never seen before.
And a 42-line.
Yeah.
We were preparing it with a 36-line.
I found a place where some heat had been spilled.
I never noticed this before.
On a 42-line?
Yeah.
A nice big blob of black ink falling over a couple of letters.
But the new one has funny pages, too, and one book where there's a fellow writing a lot of stuff in it, and we'll have to figure out all the things he wrote in.
Some of the things.
Bill helped very much with that, because he knows medieval handwriting better than I do.
And we looked at the paper stuff.
Yeah, Bill made a great job of doing all the watermarks, identifying all the watermarks.
But, I mean, I think that the thing that's interesting is that you really only notice things that society notices by spending time going through the book.
It doesn't have to be systematic.
No.
It certainly isn't systematic.
I mean, you just kind of open it, and in looking at things, you see things.
Well, he did a very systematic job on the watermark.
Yes, but that's because you told me to, and that's because we want to compare it then to the other, you know, to the other known copies.
But, I mean, this pink block that he discovered, or the 37th line that Paul Neiman said, I mean, they tend to be accidents, but you have to, which require over a period of time is a sense of familiarity.
And then with that familiarity that you build on each town, you open the book.
Do you think that 37th line is an accident?
Do you think it was just the only way that they could properly fill out the page?
I wonder if that... Oh, the 37th line, well, that's a very easy one, because one of the epistles was ending, and they had just Amen left over.
So that's where they put it.
The only alternative would be to put Amen at the top of the next page.
It's the bottom of a verso, and you have to put it on a new recto, just amen, at the end of another, of one of a book, and then start a brand new book.
So Ray decided to just admit to those circumstances to do that.
And I wouldn't give Paul Needham 100 percent credit.
I'm not very anti-Paul Needham, but I will, since his name is being thrown all around here, the Discover and the rest of it, I will tell you why.
I had something to do with that, namely that I had an individual leaf in vellum from the part of the Bible that's in this copy, and so I wanted to compare the two.
And the vellum leaf had been in a binding and had been partly trimmed, and so all the text was not there, including on its verso, the bottom of the right-hand column had been cut off.
And so I was, um, found that page, and it so happened, that's at the page where the 37th line, at the bottom of the right-hand column, which is not in the leaf I had before.
So I turned the page out, or he could see it, and I was looking at the parts that were duplicating, and looked down and saw this thing.
It had been cut off in the vellum copy, so it was right there in front of his eyes as a result of my finding a particular page, that's all.
I would have perhaps seen it eventually myself, but he hadn't been there.
I was preoccupied with the other part of the page.
Well, you have to remember that this was what would be within 15 or 20 minutes of the rock.
Oh, sure, yeah.
And there was a great deal of hovering around this book with it.
You can show the picture while you're showing the picture.
That's right, that's right.
We have a photographic record of it.
My daughter is here, pictures of a roller making a speech about the
It looks like we've had all these books.
In addition, I have the flexus bull in this type of ... There, you can see that.
There's the indentation.
That's Rowan Fulcher, yeah.
That's F-U-L-C.
Yeah, and there's Paul's head.
But you can see from the picture that there's a lot of ... There isn't quite a lot of order if you go back to the beginning.
Yeah, go back to the beginning.
And there's a cast of characters over there at the beginning, for example.
Everybody is named.
Not there, but over there, perhaps.
Some people have more pictures of them than others.
I can't describe all that in the cast of characters.
But I've seen that because I was not... I was not...
At the inner circle, I didn't realize that it was the result of this comparison that the 37 blind was discovered.
Well, that's the only reason the page is open.
I didn't know that.
I just thought he happened on it by chance.
No, he didn't.
He did not at all.
So I wanted to put it in context.
You wanted to be there as co-discoverer anyway.
No, I got that page out for that very good reason.
And he'd already discovered a notice on the page of correction, and I was looking at the correction, and then he turned his eye down to the lower right, which was not on the villain.
I don't know.
I don't believe it's ... I read the ... I'll make your pardon, the Christie's catalog very carefully.
I don't believe that's mentioned in the catalog, is it?
No, no, no.
In fact, I have a copy of that catalog with you.
Oh, you have a couple here.
That's great.
How do you feel when something like this enters your library?
That's really very pleased.
By putting the two side by side, have you been able to draw any preliminary evaluations?
I hate to take conclusions.
It's fun to put them side by side.
You can see they're about the same size in books.
Isn't there some thought that this could even be earlier than the 42?
It used to be, but it is not so.
I can show you why.
This is impossible.
The type is probably older, but the book is not older.
And the reason is right here.
This is from that book we were talking about, you see, Jasko.
Oh, yeah.
He does have a copy of it.
Now, if you look here, this is a...
That will not see it.
Okay.
I can read it.
May I sit?
I think it would be helpful.
Here's a chapter ending.
Part of the Bible is not in our copy, so I cannot... I can show you this in the 42 line, but not there.
But here the chapter ends, and then it goes... That belongs with that chapter.
Do you see the text?
Then here's chapter 5.
That refers to the new chapters.
I led that people out of slavery.
So that's the way that goes.
Now, look at what this says.
Here, it begins there.
He's mixed up there.
It really looks as though it sounds like it should be in the short to go with the upper line.
Yes, thus says the Lord, but that would be no sense.
So it's the lower line, all right, given that one.
So thus says the Lord, I, he is called.
You see it goes, ego vocatus, and this belongs with that, but this fellow thinks it doesn't.
And it shows that the copies working with one of these with no such line as that.
That's a manuscript line put in.
Right.
When I was here the first time, the last time, you were showing me how they went from the, how you believe they went from the 40 line to the 42 line and the same amount of space, and they filed off spikes and ascenders and descenders.
If this is the same type, does... That's the 42 line type.
That's the 36 line type.
But does the 36 line type have the spikes that were later filed off?
In some cases, yes.
But of course... That would indicate possibly that it's older.
Yes, I think so.
In the capital letters, I thought about that, but there are a lot of divisions.
In your catalog, if you get the type plot, why you can tell better, and the type plot of the 42 lines in here, too, you can compare them.
In a few letters, only you can see similarities, yeah, that one.
But you can see what I'm talking about there.
It's pretty hard to argue that this one went before that.
It's pretty likely that this went before that.
Oh, it did?
Okay.
Yeah.
Oh, so that has basically just proved that.
It's pretty hard to answer that evidence I think so.
Now, at least the type part in here somewhere.
I'm able to remember exactly where it is, but it is here.
No, that won't do either.
What's this one?
Yep.
Some of them are Janet's.
Oh, different people.
I've done some.
Maybe it's before.
It might be.
Everybody can look as much as I like.
I may have missed it now.
I think I have missed it.
But I found it when I was in here before.
And therefore, there's work.
It is here.
Oh, I'm disturbed.
And he most certainly had it.
There's no question on its existence.
Hold it.
Here it is right here.
That's it.
Now, if we compare the capitals here, the ones that are most... That's okay, sir.
The ones that are relevant... All right.
Let me see.
Well, I know S and, is it P?
Maybe now, wait a minute.
S is a good one.
Where's S?
There's S there.
That's fairly good.
And this is the, you see, that's the 40 line S. This is the 42 line.
I see it's filed down, rounded.
It's pointed.
Can you see?
Yeah.
And this is a,
more pointed than rounded, I would say.
F, to some extent, is more pointed.
It's not quite as clear.
Now, let me see.
Q. Well, that's not clear.
You're looking at O. There's a Q. O's over there.
Yeah, but you're... Oh, yeah, there's a Q there.
Yeah, it's all right.
Yeah, the Q is there.
I'm sorry.
Those are very similar letters.
Uh-huh.
E. What about E?
Yes, that E there is a ... That is quite an E, yes.
And the ... A lot of these are designed basically different.
The C is possible.
It gets more rounded in the 42 line type.
But a lot of them are different.
There's nothing like this in that plot.
The fellow who did this one liked the double lines very much more.
Here there's a lot of letters that don't have double lines, like there and there and, well, circular and there and there.
But look at it in the eye.
He really makes a big deal of it there.
Have any pieces of type survived through these centuries?
Probably not.
No, not of this type.
We have a piece of a 15th century type.
We are.
It's just a Roman P. This type is not certain.
Well, I remember now the letter P when we were here.
You showed me a letter, and you said, that P is probably unique to this room.
And we were talking about a specific letter from a font,
Oh, probably.
It clicks this ball, I think.
Exactly.
Yeah, that's some of this type.
It's probably the same type as... I mean, part of the invention of printing, or part of the renewable nature of it, is that you can take worn-out type and melt it down and reuse it.
So that's why I would think it tends not to survive, because it's a...
Put it in your little green... Same thing with wood blocks.
Exactly.
They could sand them down and... But eventually they get so that they have problems padding them.
Right.
Whereas as a metal, you just melt it down and it's just... At the same point.
Yeah.
That's right.
So that's why.
And that's who I can't remember Janet would know.
One of the English printers after Morris took all his tight...
to a bridge and threw it over.
Well, that's a famous story.
Yeah, it's a famous, because he didn't want anybody else using his type.
You know, he was one of these perfectionists, and it was one of those ones that, you know, in Chiswick that Janet knew about, and he and other people using his type, and he didn't want it to get in the wrong hand, so he took it all to the river and threw it in.
So it's down in the mud somewhere.
So it's down in the mud in the Thames somewhere.
Well, well.
Mr. Shetty, how do you want me to describe you professionally in my book?
As a musicologist, I know you taught music at Cornell, I believe.
Yeah, how do you want to do this?
I would like to, again, get this the way you'd like to have it done.
Well, in my active life, I was director of the Bach Aria Group, which was more musician and musicologist, I would say.
Bach Aria Group, and that is located?
Well, in those days, it was located in New York.
Uh-huh.
Okay, great.
I think that's important.
So, that was just a little biographical point.
I did that from 1946 to 1980.
Really?
Are you still, at some point, I would hope to see the Beethoven notebook.
You know, I see that.
I'd love to see that, because that is one of the truly significant contributions that you've made to the library.
Well, it's rather hard to read.
But it's the only such book in this country.
I'll put my pen away.
I don't have ballpoint pens around.
This handwriting on the cover is by the fellow Gustav Nadebaum, who wrote about his sketches in the 19th century.
Now, wait a minute.
Is it right?
I can't find it.
Which way it goes?
One.
All right.
That's okay.
This is the right way there.
Yes, that is.
All right.
Here, I happened to hit the right page for once in my life.
I don't know how much you know about Beethoven, but you recognize that theme at all?
No, sir.
That is the second movement of the Ninth Symphony.
This particular note book would have been like a sketchbook.
It's not like a sketchbook.
It is a sketchbook.
I mean, where the ideas would formulate and get them down before they leave, I guess.
Sure.
There he says, Symphony, First Beginning, Erster Unpah, and he's talking probably about this.
He gives the impression, and other people have thought this, not me only, that he's talking about the first movement of the Ninth Symphony.
This is 1815, quite the number of years before that was finished.
How do we know it's 1815?
Does he date his entry?
Oh, no, he never dates anything.
The watermarks of the paper, the works represented in it, when they were published, all that kind of thing.
It's a complicated business that has been dealt with by people that know more about it than I. His paper holds up very admirably, doesn't it?
Not too bad.
He says...
That isn't what I ... There's a sonata, he says.
Right close by here, he has a ... How many of these sketchbooks are extents?
Oh, they're ... I'm not sure how many.
I think at least 20.
Oh, really?
Maybe more.
There's some sewing.
Hmm.
And there, he says, B minor, black key.
And then there's places where he spills candle grease, and then here he has cut out, probably himself, all those pages.
And some of them may still be in existence somewhere.
One time I found a mark on one of these little stubs.
But I don't know where it is.
It's possible to find it again.
Why would you suppose he cut them out?
He wasn't happy with them, or who can say?
You can't put yourself in the mind of a genius, I suppose, a creative genius.
I haven't solved that one.
It's clear that somebody's, they have been cut out.
See, here's some candle wreaths or something.
There's a much better one.
Oh, that's great.
Look at that.
That's page 55, Lee 55, yes, that's where that is.
He was burning a candle at one end, anyway.
And there are quite a number of songs in here, and there's one song here.
There's about 25 or more different openings.
What we call variants?
Yes, they're all different.
And when he came to do something in final, as a fair copy, he would do that in other paper?
He didn't do it here.
Didn't do it here.
Do you suspect he probably carried this around with him, or just... I think it's possible now.
You can... I have seen traces.
Yeah, look at there, for example.
Folded, sure.
Yeah, it looks as though it might have been folded sometime or other.
It might have been stuffed in his pocket some time or other.
Thank you very much for showing that.
Some day it ought to be.
Everything render particular work, but there are something like 10,000 pages that they're doing sketches, and if they put them all sorted out, it will take some centuries.
But this is on, okay, as we're on.
That's the page on which there is a vellum or a production that has been cut off down here.
And you may get it or something.
It's in the case of the left.
Well, would you do me a favor?
A great favor?
Would you take a picture of me, sir?
I'll focus it.
I hadn't even thought of this.
Here we are sitting.
All you have to do is look through that thing with a ray of fire to push that button.
It should be focused.
I can't remember which one.
It's a large one, I think.
Are we both in that picture?
this might even be the dust jacket see um uh see that's the same as that you get it and then um anyway what what what's his name uh um
Paul first said, ah, correction, he said, see.
Look at that.
See, rogavi.
It doesn't mean anything.
So there it is corrected to rogavi, which is right.
It is corrected.
See?
That would be corrected by hand.
Yeah.
They erased this A, and then they put it in the O, you see.
See, they were very careful.
They didn't want any, uh— This one never got corrected.
They tore it up and put it in the binding before they had any chance to do anything about it.
Look at the conditions of this.
Has this ever been washed, do you think, or treated?
I think it's very unlikely.
Very unlikely.
so you see you don't see anything down here but then paul found that so that's how we have this page open because of this that's all and and on this page that when they made the correction they must have stuck in the amen or where was the amen no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no it's probably not washed but it's probably
It's been very tightly bound, and so you can't find out where the gatherings are from this copy.
It does here.
Yeah.
That was, I mean, that's Felix Orian's hand marking where things are.
He went through doing that kind of thing, which is a good idea.
So you can find out where you're going.
But it's a herring binding, which is a well-known English binder.
It's so tightly bound you can't see.
The condition is so much more remarkable than I would have expected to see, I think.
Yeah.
Well, you could hope for a little less, 17th and 18th, then turn a little more.
15th, but that's... Never mind.
Never mind.
You can hope for it.
You don't think badly about it.
Exactly.
All right.
Now, where are the funny things here?
Yeah, show them the funny things.
Yeah, I want to show them the funny things.
Um... Like 10.
Like 10 right over here.
All right, we'll go a little further.
I'm going to ask you to shoot one more when you get a chance.
It'll be ready.
I used to do this Friday.
This could be the dust jacket picture, Mr. Shady.
Hmm?
There has to be a picture of me in the dust jacket, and this would be the one, don't you think?
Well, I don't know.
Where are you from?
Oh, yeah, that's the best.
Well, that's one of the pages.
Now, here's a funny page, one that's so straight in there.
Thank you, pencil.
A strong ink, well, weak ink, see, huh?
Okay.
And, uh... Thank you.
That'll do it.
The size of the book is about the size of it.
Oh, it is.
It's about the same.
So that's why the columns are, well, there are fewer lines.
The columns are the same thing.
One of the things that you enjoy so much about your 42-line Bible, you had told me previously, is that it's amazing how
Yeah, you never get hyphenations at the end of columns.
But you do there, I see.
But you do here, I know.
All the time.
Oh, yes.
This fellow, you remember that very nicely.
It's true, you cannot find it there, but to hear this fellow doesn't give a damn about it at all.
That would almost indicate that, that would almost be an argument that it was earlier, or they didn't care.
uh all right but then you have to put into that the thing i showed you a few minutes ago and then you had that phrase of this is the i was just mentioning how on the 42 you do have hyphenations to end columns and and you do here well but look at the beginning before they got this 42 line bible to work from they weren't even paying attention to their margins um very very opening pages here look at there look at that that's very bad how do you feel when you have something like this
See, look at that, a terrible margin.
What is this here?
It's a preface.
No, that's somebody's correction.
It's probably a mistake there, and they stroke it out and put in what it should say.
Yeah, a Bill Madonis, or whatever that word is, it's a medieval Latin word.
But see these margins?
See how ragged they are?
Look at that.
There and there.
He straightens them out after they got their 42-line Bible to work from, which has very good margins.
from the start.
These fellas in, what you call it, Bamberg, didn't have the same standards, that's all.
The people were doing it, were not the fella that brought the type over, evidently, and they didn't care.
But when they began, see, look at that.
See, it's getting straightened out now.
And see, it's better now.
It's calming down.
It's not very good.
The average is improving, and after a while, you see, it's pretty good.
Now, did you show them where the worn-out type is on this part and the new part?
No, I haven't done that one yet.
How do you determine that, just in terms of the impression?
How do I determine what?
That some type is worn out.
Oh, you'll see.
I'll give you an opportunity to make your judgment up yourself, sir.
Look how nice and dark that is.
Yeah, sure, most of the time it's very good.
Where are we?
Gosh, I don't know where we are.
This might be it, as a matter of fact.
There we are.
This is supposed to be worn type.
This is supposed to be new type.
Newer, fresher type.
Can you see the difference?
Not at the moment.
Not just yet, no.
Well, now, hang on.
Let's see, take that O there, for example, and then this O over here, or that O there, or that E, that's pretty, the general impression, I think, that's, the impressions are wider than here, they're sharper and narrower.
Can you tell the difference?
Uh-huh.
Take down there, look at that, that O, for example, as opposed to that O.
See how kind of muddy it is.
Are these still spaced at the same intervals?
Would it come out to 36 if they continued?
I suppose so, it seems to be.
Well, it seems to be right on top of that line.
I wonder how they would have logged for us to just... Yeah, you see if you hold it up to the right.
Yep, it's right on.
It's matching.
And these red lines go into the... Of course, that's a manuscript.
That's all manuscripts.
Then there is a very bad page that Felix didn't notice.
You know, it's a beautiful page that I had open.
This is the best of the illuminations.
These letters here are the best ones.
I had a picture.
And then the place where there's, you know, over here, I think.
Yeah, look at that.
See?
It all slipped.
It's very bad.
I don't see a single instance of that in the 42-line Bible.
Well, there has been some writing in there, too.
Oh, yes.
Well, that's different.
One thing at a time.
This is the press, obviously, you see.
I'm surprised they kept that page.
Yes, it's a ... That would almost be a page that they would have ... Look at that.
See down there?
The fellows crossed that, the manuscript fellow, or a manuscript cross some of that out.
But that's obviously the press as well as the manuscript man.
Nulla, for example, all that inkblots and drops.
It straightens out.
Everything's nice down here.
At the top, something sure happened.
Uh-huh.
Mm-hmm.
Well, in your comments on that one, presumably what happens is that at a certain point, you don't have any choice.
I mean, you've printed however many copies you're going to print.
You've gone on to the next one.
When you start assembling, you see, well, this is not so good.
You put that bottom of the pile.
but eventually you have to do it over again, or use one of the slightly damaged ones, because they must break up the pages of sites.
Exactly.
They've got to do it and go on to the next group.
So you don't have the choice at a certain point.
Probably by the chance you know this, I mean, you probably do it and stack them up, and then it's too late by the time.
We're not dealing with unlimited types of forms.
Exactly.
Somebody here got very excited about the Philippians.
See, look, there's something rubbed out there.
Yeah, there's something rubbed out there.
Well, you would find out if we tried what that is.
How much time did you spend with the book, though?
Quite a bit.
I did the watermark.
You're basically doing that on every page?
Yeah, I did every page.
There are ten watermarkes, you know, from a few of these.
So you identified them all as really a piece of research, I would say.
Would you write an article on that?
No, well, unless we find something that...
We have to get it.
It helps to understand the way the watermarks develop.
Why don't we go with two illuminated letters here?
Well, this is a preface, and it just happens to be a short preface.
Argumentum.
It's called insipid argumentum, I guess.
I don't know why that thing's there.
All right, well, there you are.
That's great.
That makes the trip.
I am interested also.
So happens that the 36-line business coincides with my class, the class of 1936.
You showed me some 36-line type the last time.
Yeah, well, all right.
So they're going to put a notice about this in the class of notes.
It hasn't come out yet?
I'm sure they will.
No, in the middle of April, I suppose.
You talk about understatement.
When I was here the first time, you said there was probably more 36-line type in this room than any other room in the hemisphere.
And now you add... It won't change that.
It won't change that.
Make a little stronger.
Yeah.
And...
It's exciting, isn't it?
How do you feel, Bill, when you see this?
I'm very excited.
I won't be able to find it.
What was your family's reaction to this?
Were they supportive to this decision all the way?
Oh, yes.
Roland called Bill from London.
Then Louise, his daughter, called him from Philadelphia.
I called him from other phone calls, whizzing around within.
It was before lunch, wasn't it?
I think so, yes.
Of course, it would be afternoon in London.
Yes, well before lunch, all these telephone calls were whizzing around.
Everybody wanted to know what happened.
So for the class, I'll have it open here, and you can read this, you see.
Now, the sons of Eli were sons of Belial.
You did not know the Lord, see?
So that's a good one for the class, actually.
That's right.
The Eli's.
Yeah, that's right.
See, there it is, the sons of Eli and Haley.
That's funny.
They were sons of the devil.
So I always thought that if a Princeton minister ever got a chance to preach in the Hill Chapel, that's a text he should use.
The binding is pretty nice, too.
Well, that's Earl Spencer's binder.
But I mean, I hope that's a lot of remarkable.
But a part of 200 years.
Yeah.
And there's a binder's ticket there.
There's Charles Herring.
G-R-I-N-G, bound by C. Herring.
Ten... Probably in German.
Beautiful.
I think that's probably... I would imagine it's a German name.
Just nobody knows what happened to the second volume.
Oh, yeah.
Well, you know, there's four parts.
There's four units.
And this has units one and four.
And the joint I showed you is between one and four.
I see.
And the second unit, which goes from Chronicles to Psalms, I think, is in the Rans copy.
The third one, from Proverbs to Prophets, disappeared as somebody who didn't know knows.
Well, this one is safe here.
But it's nice to have it here.
Congratulations, Biblia, Latina, and...
Vetustissima, very old.
V-E-T-U-S-T-I-S.
Vetustissima, yes.
What is that?
How does that translate?
Most old.
Very old.
Very interesting.
Yeah.
V-E-T.
U-S-T.
I-S-S-I-M-A.
Very old.
Yeah.
I would say so.
It's a superlative adjective.
Superlative form of answer.
Okay.
Well, I...
I'm fortunate that we had an earlier interview, so I think anything I ask you would be repetitive, and I see no point in doing that.
I did bring along a copy.
Oh, wait, did you have something?
No.
This is the first book printed in Hungary, and there's only a copy in this country.
Wow.
Where does it tell?
It says it.
Vinita Buda, as in pest, B-U-D-E.
Yeah.
Oh, in Buda, of course.
That's right, yeah.
1473.
Wow.
And the putter Andreas Hest, and he was imported from Rome by a Hungarian bishop or something.
Is this a recent acquisition?
A year ago.
This is a better copy in some respects than the one we saw in Hungary.
And it's the only one in... Oh, yes, there's no copy in England either.
How do you find these things?
Oh, Roland got a hold of it.
Oh, there it is.
Oh, that's the best letter.
It's called the Chronicles of... Chronica Hungar... In chronica hungarorum, yes.
C-R-O-N-I-C-A-H-U-N-G.
H-U-N-G.
A-R.
O-R-U-M.
It's a medieval history of Hungary in Latin, and all kinds of crazy names in here.
There's one of the less crazy names, Ladislaus.
That's not so bad, but there's some that are worse than that, I can assure you.
That's wonderful.
You can see the Italian Renaissance print coming in here.
You very quietly added to this collection,
with determination, no question about that.
Well, that's a facsimile.
But there are hardly any facsimiles, at least.
Now, can I ask you a question?
Is this a book that you'd heard of before it was proposed to you?
You had heard of it, so it's not like a target of opportunity, so to speak.
But I didn't know it was possible to buy one.
Oh, yeah.
It's very rare.
It's a comparable rarity to the Besson book.
Oh, really?
Oh, yeah.
No, 11 copies.
No, 11 or 13.
Around a dozen.
So in Hungary, it would probably be treated with the same... Oh, it's a national treasure.
Oh, very much so, yes.
You bet.
And how many of them are in Hungary, I wonder?
Oh, 67, I would think, anyway.
Yeah, yeah.
A majority.
It almost doesn't even look like a printed book.
It's so... Well, that's print, all right.
That's print, but I mean, it almost looks like we could... Yeah, it's heavily rubricated.
Well, most of those books were...
Well, I'm not going to take up too much of your time.
You better give Mark a chance to tell you about it.